# **De novo Assembly Pipeline for Long Reads**

This de novo assembly pipeline is designed to assemble DNA sequences generated by Oxford Nanopore technology.  

### *Basic Setup*

- Create an environment with all required tools:

```bash
conda create -n denovo -c bioconda python fastx_toolkit samtools porechop flye quast prokka minimap2 racon
```

- Basecalling is performed using Dorado. Installation instructions are available here: [Dorado GitHub Repository](https://github.com/nanoporetech/dorado).

## NOTE: If you already have FASTQ files, skip directly to *Section 2*.

## Section 1: 

The raw sequencing data is generated in POD5 or FastQ format and is demultiplexed according to the sequencing setup. Real-time basecalling can be performed during sequencing, making this step optional. However, depending on the experiment, re-running basecalling using more efficient models might be desirable. If basecalling hasn’t been done or needs to be repeated, follow these steps: 

**Before running Dorado, download the basecalling models:**

```bash
dorado download --model <model name>
dorado download --model all # To download all available models
```

Dorado outputs data in BAM format by default. To generate FASTQ files, use the `--emit-fastq` option or convert BAM files to FASTQ using Samtools. 

1. **Basecalling**
```bash
dorado basecaller <model> pod5s/ > calls.bam # Recommended model: dna_r10.4.1_e8.2_400bps_sup@v4.3.0
```

*To convert BAM files to FASTQ format:* 

```bash
samtools fastq <BAM> > <FASTQ>
```

## Section 2: 

Scripts for running the programs on a dataset are named as follows:

- `Run_concatenate.py`
- `Run_QC_first.py`
- `Run_trimming_check.py`
- `Run_assembly_QC.py`
- `Run_polishing.py`
  
**Before executing, modify the `input_folder` variable in each script:** 

```python
input_folder = "/PATH/TO/FASTQ/"
```

**Execute the scripts using:** 

```bash
python <Run.py> </PATH/TO/FASTQ/>
```

The steps in the pipeline are detailed below with examples for each script:

### Sequence Preprocessing

I. **Merge all FASTQ files obtained from basecalling:**

```bash
cat *.fastq.gz > merge.fastq.gz
```

II. **Quality control:**

```bash
fastqc [-t <threads>] merge.fastq.gz  # Used 14 threads for the -t option
```

FastQC documentation: [FastQC Help](https://home.cc.umanitoba.ca/~psgendb/doc/fastqc.help)

III. **Trimming:**

```bash
porechop -i merge.fastq.gz -o trimm.fastq  # Basic trimming mode
```

Porechop documentation: [Porechop GitHub Repository](https://github.com/rrwick/Porechop)

IV. **Quality control:** 

```bash
fastqc [-t <threads>] trimm.fastq.gz  # Used 14 threads for the -t option
```

This step ensures the trimming was successful and determines if adjustments are needed. 

### Sequence Assembly

I. **Assembly:**

```bash
flye --nano-raw trimm.fastq --out-dir flye --threads 4
```

Flye documentation: [Flye Usage Guide](https://gensoft.pasteur.fr/docs/Flye/2.9/USAGE.html)

II. **Assembly quality:**

```bash
quast.py /flye/assembly.fasta -o quast_assembly
```

Quast documentation: [Quast GitHub Repository](https://github.com/ablab/quast)
  
III. **Polishing:**

```bash
minimap2 -a -t 14 /flye/assembly.fasta trimm.fastq > assembly.sam
racon -t 8 -m 8 -x -6 -g -8 -w 500 -u trimm.fastq assembly.sam /flye/assembly.fasta > polishing.fasta
```

Minimap2 documentation: [Minimap2 GitHub Repository](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2)

Racon documentation: [Racon GitHub Repository](https://github.com/isovic/racon)

### Optional: Visualization of the Assembly in IGV

```bash
samtools sort assembly.sam > sorted.bam
samtools index sorted.bam
```

In IGV:  
- Click **Genomes** -> **Load Genome from File** and load the `assembly.fasta` file generated by Flye or Racon.  
- Click **File** -> **Load From File** and select the sorted and indexed BAM file.
